---
date: '2023-11-04'
title: "Augmented Reality in Surgery"
description: "Soon with AR glasses instead of a stethoscope - how surgery could look like in the future with augmented reality."
image: "/images/blog/augmented-reality-op.png"
---


The race for augmented reality in medicine has begun. Companies and
start-ups tirelessly research and develop to make the first real
applications of augmented reality in surgery a reality. We have also
been running in this race together with the Leipzig University
Hospital for almost 1.5 years and have already been able to bring
various developments into use. What exactly have we been able to get
off the ground so far?


Navigation in the brain - or - where in the MRI image is the tip of
the instrument currently located?

Navigation in the brain is currently the first and only navigation
option in the OR. While conventional devices rely on large tripods,
cameras and reference points on the operating table to calculate the
instrument's position in the patient using image recognition, we are
trying to compress the same functionality in the "Hololens 2" AR
glasses. Instead of looking at the screen of the device, repeatedly
aligning the instrument in the camera's field of view and then
recognizing the position on the screen, with AR the corresponding
MRI or CT images should simply be displayed next to the patient and
appear exactly when when the surgeon needs them. These functions are
no longer a vision, but have already been implemented by us to a
large extent and are currently being tested for use in the OR.


In connection with this, we are also working in another area of
​​neurosurgery and are trying to develop a sign function on the
brain - why?

In the case of certain tumors in the brain near the speech center,
an awake operation can be scheduled to remove them. A wake
operation, therefore, in order to be able to localize the important
language functions near the tumor and thus protect them. The brain
is stimulated with electricity in the areas around the tumor and the
patient's ability to speak is tested. If language restrictions
(word-finding disorders, etc.) become audible, the surgeon knows
that the area just stimulated is important for the ability to speak.
This is where the problem comes in - in order to mark this area, the
position must now be recorded by hand and e.g. marked on the brain
with a piece of sterile paper. As the operation progresses, these
pieces of paper can slip and have to be repositioned, which is
time-consuming. In order to overcome this hurdle, augmented reality
is to be used for marking in the future - by simply digitally
"drawing" the places on the brain. Together with the doctors and
researchers of the university hospital, we are working on solutions
like these to improve the work of the doctors and the experience of
the patients through augmented reality.
